---
layout: post
title:      "Sinatra Web App: Aviation Fleet Manager"
date:       2018-07-25 10:21:41 +0000
permalink:  sinatra_web_app_aviation_fleet_manager
---


<p>Utilizing Sinatra, ActiveRecord, and a plethora of other gems, I created a basic CRUD web app. The app, Aviation Fleet Manager, allows users to sign up, log in, and perform create, read, update, and delete operations on an aircraft model. I added some code to make the create, update, delete, and log out links unavailable and invisible to users that are not logged into the app. This is accomplished with simple logic blocks that rely on session data. Using bcrypt and Rack::MethodOverride allowed for password protection and enhanced create/delete functionality, respectively. AcrtiveRecord associations of User has_many and aircraft belongs_to made database management easier.</p> <p>Overall, the app is pretty simple. A user signs up, which automatically logs the user in. From that point, a user can create new aircraft to add to his fleet and can edit said aircraft. The app is coded so that no user can alter or delete data made by a different user. Moreover, if a user attempts to create a previously generated username, they are shown an error message stating a different name must be selected. A similar error message is displayed upon an incorrect log in attempt.</p><p>Any user, logged in or not, can view the entirety of all fleet aircraft in the database (sqlite). However, to create, view, or edit a specific fleet or aircraft requires the user to be logged in. I added some basic css to provide a simple and clean user interface for all the views. This was mainly done using a primary layout with a yield block to display various views. I opted to have the User’s fleet page include a link to edit any listed aircraft and a button to delete any listed aircraft. I could have setup separate views, but decided it was a simpler UX/UI to have the view fleet include those functionalities.</p><p>The app can be cloned and accessed from github: https://github.com/Kiveo/Aviation-Fleet-Manager. After cloning, run rake db:migrate. Type into the directory console “shotgun” to test out the app on a local host. I opted to use the MIT license, so feel free to test it out. I hope you enjoy the Aviation Fleet Manager ! </p>
